Testnet Phase 2 Rework: Drand && Consensus (#939)
filecoin-project/specs: src/algorithms/crypto/randomness.md

title: "Randomness"
---

TODO: clean up stale .id/.go files

{{<label randomness>}}

Randomness is used throughout the protocol in order to generate values and extend the blockchain.
Random values are drawn from a {{<sref drand>}} beacon and appropriately formatted for usage.
We describe this formatting below.

## Encoding Random Beacon randomness for on-chain use

Entropy from the drand beacon can be harvested into a more general data structure: a `BeaconEntry`, defined as follows:

```go
type BeaconEntry struct {
    // Drand Round for the given randomness
    Round       uint64
    // Drand Signature for the given Randomness

>     Data   []byte

Author: This was a point from @whyrusleeping (as per lotus impl of the beacon), the idea being to adopt a more general name in case the beacon ever changes and no longer relies on a signature per se. 

I am very agnostic here. I think I tend to agree that the change would be large enough that leaving it as sig is simpler for now...

All randomness used in the protocol must be generated in conjunction with a unique DST, as well as 
certain {{<sref crypto_signatures>}} and {{<sref vrf>}} usage.

## Forming Randomness Seeds

The beacon entry is combined with a few elements for use as part of the protocol as follows:

- a DST (domain separation tag)
    - Different uses of randomness are distinguished by this type of personalization which ensures that randomness used for different purposes will not conflict with randomness used elsewhere in the protocol
- the epoch number, ensuring

>     - liveness for leader election -- in the case no one is elected in a round and no new drand entry has appeared, the new epoch number will output new randomness for LE

Reviewer: 1. "drand" -> "beacon".
2. I am not sure I agree with the fact that liveness is guaranteed in the absence of the beacon in the current version of the protocol.

Author: where do you see that second claim made? The above statement only says that if the frequency of the beacon is less than Fil's, we still have liveness. I'll detail a bit to avoid confusion

{{< readfile file="/docs/actors/actors/crypto/randomness.go" code="true" lang="go" >}}
{{< readfile file="/docs/systems/filecoin_blockchain/struct/chain/chain.go" code="true" lang="go" >}}

## Drawing tickets from the VRF-chain for proof inclusion

> There are a few instances in which the protocol requires inclusion  to be drawn from the Filecoin blockchain's VRF-chain (which generates {{<sref tickets>}} with each new block), in order to tie certain proofs to a particular set of Filecoin blocks (i.e. a given chain or fork). This is notably the case for Seal Pre-commits (see {{<sref sealing>}}).

Reviewer 2: Can we list out the instances where it is the case ? It's not obvous right now (to me and I believe @sa8 )

Reviewer: Tl;dr sealrandomness is VRF chain all the rest is drand. I believe this can come in a separate PR.

Author: Per @nicola's point, I feel like current phrasing should suffice. Otherwise I can do this, but feels a bit restrictive:

```suggestion
There are a few instances in which the protocol requires inclusion  to be drawn from the Filecoin blockchain's VRF-chain (which generates {{<sref tickets>}} with each new block), in order to tie certain proofs to a particular set of Filecoin blocks (i.e. a given chain or fork). This is currently only the case for Seal Pre-commits (see {{<sref sealing>}}).
```
